URL: https://www.eleken.co/blog-posts/design-qa-checklist-to-test-ui-and-prepare-for-design-handoff

Article
Design process
updated on: 
19 Mar
,
2025
Design QA Checklist to Test UI and Prepare For Design Handoff
10
min to read
Table of contents
TL;DR
The line between love and hate in the design is thin. Hours spent on approving concepts, preparing mood boards, color palettes, and brand collateral lists don’t guarantee the client will be satisfied with the result. Tiny imperfections and concealed bugs may result in the end-product looking unfinished and not worth paying for. For teams who want to get rid of headaches during the design handoff (not to say to stay motivated), the design QA checklist should become a near-at-hand tool.
If you’ve started to search in Google “what is a QA checklist?” – stop. Because in this article,
 Eleken
 has drawn up everything one needs to know about a checklist in testing designs and how to adhere to it. We’ve also prepared a ready-to-use checklist design team can download and use in its day-to-day work. So, enjoy!
The most common UI/UX design problems 
Designers face loads of stumbling stones on their way to creating a seamless website landing page or application interface. A truly skilled UI/UX designer is a ninja in matching client requirements, personal design preferences, and common
 UI/UX design principles
. 

Struggling with design handoff?

Read more

However, even experienced designers have to polish the final results before presenting them to clients. Below we grouped some of the most common concerns.
CTA buttons are too small
The graphics and color intensity may be so strong that interactive elements, for example, buttons, can fade. The same might happen if there’s not enough padding inside the button or if it looks too unusual, for example, has a weird shape. 
If buttons are too small, CTAs become less clear and noticeable. As a result, they fade on the page and don't lead to user conversions.
Messy overlapping
Managing overlaps and collages is a tough task. Opened menus, popups, and sticky elements complicate across-site navigation and make the page look cluttered.
Image source
Poor navigation
“Go back” arrows, and scrollable carousels make UX much easier. If the elements mentioned aren’t visible or don’t work properly, users may leave the website or app without browsing it and deepening the content. As a result, the average session duration will decrease dramatically.
No hover over buttons, links, or form fields
When you move a mouse cursor over an interactive object, you want to have that feeling that you can click on it, right? In design, this effect comes through hovering (highlighting) clickable objects: buttons, links, menu items, and so on. A hover focuses user attention and encourages taking actions, for instance, clicking on a button or filling in the subscription form.
Text that looks like a link (and vice versa)
Underlined words deceive users because they look like hyperlinks. So, it’s better not to misuse them.
Neglecting white space
There should be enough “air” or blank space (not necessarily white) between elements. If not, the layout won’t look balanced and users will feel overwhelmed with the information and visuals they see.
Insufficient color contrast
Text contrast against the background isn’t just a matter of personal design preferences. Low-contrast content is one of the major website accessibility issues that
 Google suggests fixing
. Moreover, because around
 5% of people
 suffer from color blindness, it’s important that you stick to the
 1.4.3 contrast minimum
.
Broken text alignment on mobile
Centered content can be not as accessible on mobile, as it is on desktop. And for users, it’s neither easy to skim through text canvases of left-aligned content. A way out may be - to apply justified text alignment.
Important information isn’t highlighted enough
In the attempt to carry out creative ideas, it may be difficult to focus on what’s first of all noteworthy on the webpage. For example, if you create a “Pricing” landing page for a SaaS company, subscription plans names and prices should be clear-cut. Other on-page elements, like pop-ups or banners, shouldn’t distract users’ attention from the “Buy now” buttons.
Snov.io before the redesign
‍
Disregarded
 core web vitals
Although Google webmaster guidelines aren’t something a UX designer should be proficient with, keep in mind that the faster content elements render while the page loads, the better the website’s overall “quality score” will be.
Poor design versatility
The client may want to impose changes, so you should be able to adjust the prototype effortlessly - at any given moment, even after the release.
Design QA process with a quality control checklist
So, what is a checklist in testing? Simply put, this is a sequence of stages to assess the accuracy of the software. Quite the opposite to ad hoc testing checklists allow structuring and systematizing the quality assurance process. They prevent excessive testing and allow covering all functional components of the end-product.
In design, the QA should cover all 5 quality dimensions of design outcomes. We’ve prepared a full quality assurance checklist that will come in handy for pretty any design team.
First we review the 
consistency
:
1. Review overall layout
Balanced pages are more pleasing to the eye, so always double-check whether design elements, including margins, paddings, and borders, look aligned. Choose a single focal point within a grid to deem other elements’ positions. Make sure there’s enough whitespace between objects and re-use motifs, where possible.
Image source
2. Check content
Dip into on-page content styling. If there are several similar text containers on a single webpage, their formatting (font and background colors, font size, text alignment) should be the same.
To combine several fonts, choose complementary yet not too similar ones. Also, maintain visual hierarchy and use contrasting font sizes - to distinguish them better.
Image credit
3. Look at visual elements
Use the same
 UX design patterns
 for buttons, forms, and drop-down menus all over the website or app, and align them correspondingly. Also, make sure related elements look coherently. For example, a “Buy PRO plan” button should be more highlighted than its “Start free plan” alternative.
Image source
Then we move on to 
functionality
:
4. Make a trial run of navigation
Navigation tests imply developing scenarios or use cases. For example:
“start with the homepage → try to find contact option as soon as possible”
or 
“proceed to the checkout page → go back to the online shopping cart → edit the order”
.
In these tests, users have to click certain navigational “hitzones” (the parts of the interface that can be clicked). If, for some reason, users don’t click on one of the expected hitzones, they’re asked to provide feedback on what went wrong. After, you can adjust the initial
 UX flow
 diagram and improve navigation.
5. Check submenus
Submenus may be a bottleneck in Ecommerce website and app design due to that space in the header is quite limited. To smooth the UI, you can add hover and wavy transitions. If you design an Ecommerce app for a big retailer, it’s reasonable to use multi-level submenus. For booking websites or apps – use popup filtering bars and icons instead of text.
6. Try using the search box (if any)
There are 3 common issues with search boxes to avoid:
they’re hardly noticeable
their input fields are too short
the “Submit” button is styled the same as the input field.
Also, try not to create too advanced search boxes because they usually confuse users and make them want to back off search attempts at all.
Image source
‍
7. Test drop-down lists
Although
 SEO managers don’t like drop-downs
, these lists still have their place in web design. The only thing is - not to overuse them.
Ask yourself whether you can replace a drop-down list with toggle switches, checkboxes, steppers, or radio buttons. If the answer is “No”, then make sure an opened drop-down list doesn’t end up going off the screen. In case the list is too detailed, for example, contains
 more than 5 options
, enhance it with multiple select options.
Image source
‍
8. Check the design of the hamburger menu
Some
 say
 that it’s better to replace hamburgers with tab bars or toggle menus because of better UX. But it’s still a matter of preferences. If you do implement a hamburger menu in the design, make it noticeable and self-evident. The menu should give users an idea about what they can access on the website or app. Perhaps, in some cases, it’s good to list the most important elements and leave hamburgers for less relevant stuff (the way Facebook does in its app).
Now it's turn to check the 
responsiveness
:
9. Check appearance on different screen sizes
Lack of responsiveness usually results in inconvenient scrolling and zooming, so make sure users will be able to browse the website from any device with no losses in functionality. To test responsiveness, you can use emulating tools, like
 BrowserStack
 or others.
10. Check appearance in different browsers
Chrome, Safari, Internet Explorer, and other browsers have distinct layout engines and interpret code languages differently. There’s nothing bad with it - it’s just about double-checking if the text and graphics still display correctly.
Then, check the 
interactive elements
:
11. Try filling in forms
Whether you use a subscription form, a downloadable lead magnet, or embed Calendly on the website, try out how these work. Enhance forms with popups, like “Thank you!” or “Processing...” messages. And don’t forget that every form should be integrated with a CRM.
12. Test popups
Cookie notification messages and overlay banners should match page colors yet be well-marked and eye-catching. Use a color block to highlight the popup even more and make the text easier to read. And don’t forget to add

[Content truncated]